# [journal.

stuffwithstuff.com][1]

   [1]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/

## me

  * [bob nystrom][2] is me
  * [bitbucket][3] has code
  * [github][4] has code
  * [flickr][5] has photos
  * [twitter][6] has status
  * [vimeo][7] has video

   [2]: http://www.stuffwithstuff.com/bob-nystrom.html
   [3]: http://bitbucket.org/munificent/
   [4]: http://github.com/munificent/
   [5]: http://www.flickr.com/photos/bobisbob/
   [6]: http://twitter.com/munificentbob
   [7]: http://vimeo.com/bobisbob

## archives

  * [2011][8]
  * [2010][9]
  * [2009][10]
  * [2008][11]

   [8]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/2011/ (2011)
   [9]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/2010/ (2010)
   [10]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/2009/ (2009)
   [11]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/2008/ (2008)

## tags

  * [blog][12] (2)
  * [c#][13] (13)
  * [code][14] (48)
  * [cpp][15] (7)
  * [design][16] (3)
  * [f#][17] (2)
  * [finch][18] (3)
  * [game-dev][19] (6)
  * [game-patterns][20] (3)
  * [go][21] (2)
  * [jasic][22] (1)
  * [java][23] (10)
  * [javascript][24] (3)
  * [language][25] (29)
  * [magpie][26] (19)
  * [optimization][27] (1)
  * [oscon][28] (1)
  * [parsing][29] (7)
  * [politics][30] (1)
  * [python][31] (2)
  * [roguelike][32] (2)
  * [ruby][33] (1)
  * [sml][34] (1)
  * [visualization][35] (1)

   [12]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/blog/ (View all posts filed under blog)
   [13]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/c/ (View all posts filed under c#)
   [14]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/code/ (View all posts filed under code)
   [15]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/cpp/ (View all posts filed under cpp)
   [16]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/design/ (View all posts filed under design)
   [17]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/f/ (View all posts filed under f#)
   [18]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/finch/ (View all posts filed under finch)
   [19]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/game-dev/ (View all posts filed under game-dev)
   [20]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/game-patterns/ (View all posts filed under game-patterns)
   [21]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/go/ (View all posts filed under go)
   [22]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/jasic/ (View all posts filed under jasic)
   [23]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/java/ (View all posts filed under java)
   [24]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/javascript/ (View all posts filed under javascript)
   [25]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/language/ (View all posts filed under language)
   [26]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/magpie/ (View all posts filed under magpie)
   [27]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/optimization/ (View all posts filed under optimization)
   [28]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/oscon/ (View all posts filed under oscon)
   [29]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/parsing/ (View all posts filed under parsing)
   [30]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/politics/ (View all posts filed under politics)
   [31]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/python/ (View all posts filed under python)
   [32]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/roguelike/ (View all posts filed under roguelike)
   [33]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/ruby/ (View all posts filed under ruby)
   [34]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/sml/ (View all posts filed under sml)
   [35]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/visualization/ (View all posts filed under visualization)

## info

  * [famfamfam][36] provides icons
  * [RSS][37] syndicates me
  * [WordPress][38] powers me

   [36]: http://famfamfam.com/lab/icons/silk/
   [37]: feed:http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/feed/
   [38]: http://wordpress.org/

## [Methods on the Ether: Or Creating Your Own Control Structures for Fun and
Profit][39]

   [39]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/2010/06/25/methods-on-the-ether-or-creating-your-own-control-structures-for-fun-and-profit/ (Methods on the Ether: Or Creating Your Own Control Structures for Fun and Profit)

[code][40] | [finch][41] | [language][42] | [parsing][43] [2010][44] /
[06][45] / [25][46]

   [40]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/code/ (View all posts in code)
   [41]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/finch/ (View all posts in finch)
   [42]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/language/ (View all posts in language)
   [43]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/parsing/ (View all posts in parsing)
   [44]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/2010/ (year)
   [45]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/2010/06/ (month)
   [46]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/2010/06/25/

One of my favorite things about [Lisp][47] and [Smalltalk][48] is that they
don't have special syntax for control structures. Sometimes the most elegant
way to express a solution to a problem requires a [unique flow control
construct][49]. Beyond that, there's something appealingly minimal about a
language that doesn't have a fixed set of hardcoded magic keywords.

   [47]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lisp_%28programming_language%29
   [48]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smalltalk
   [49]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain-specific_language

Unfortunately, languages like Lisp and Smalltalk that have this feature
typically marry it to a syntax that looks strange to the large number of the
world's programmers who were weaned on C and other curly brace languages. To
explore a couple of a ideas, I started tinkering on a little interpreted
language called [Finch][50]. Here, I'll try to explain how I addressed the
build-your-own-control-flow problem while (I hope) keeping the syntax
relatively readable to most people.

   [50]: http://bitbucket.org/munificent/finch

### A Smalltalk Primer

Finch is inspired directly by Smalltalk (by way of [Self][51]), so it'll help
to review how Smalltalk handles control flow before we get to Finch. If you
know Smalltalk, feel free to skip this.

   [51]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self_%28programming_language%29

Let's consider a fairly boring chunk of code in a curly language:



    if (numWeasels > numCakes) {
        print("Not enough cakes!");
    } else {
        for (int i = 0; i < numWeasels; i++) {
            print("A weasel eats a cake!");
        }
    }


We've got three keywords there: `if`, `else`, and `for`. Here's how that code
would look in Smalltalk:



    numWeasels > numCakes ifTrue: [
        "Not enough cakes!" print
    ] ifFalse: [
        i := 0.
        [ i < numWeasels ] whileTrue: [
            "A weasel eats a cake!" print.
            i := i + 1
        ]
    ]


Whoa, what? First, we'll gloss over the basic stuff we don't care about here:
`.` is used to separate statements, `:=` is for assignment, and the function
(method) comes after the argument instead of before.

The control flow part of that code is this:



    ... ifTrue: [
        ...
    ] ifFalse: [
        [ ... ] whileTrue: [ ... ]
    ]


You may think that all we've done is simple replacement: curlies become square
brackets, `if` becomes `ifTrue:`, etc. Not so fast. `ifTrue:`, `IfFalse:`, and
`whileTrue:` aren't reserved words in Smalltalk. They aren't special at all,
in fact: you could implement them in Smalltalk itself if you wanted to. Here's
how:

An if/then construct is basically a "procedure" that takes three arguments: a
boolean condition to check, a block of code to execute if the condition is
true and (optionally) a block to execute if the condition is false. If you
were to declare a "function" for if/then in C, it would look like:



    void IfThen(bool condition, code ifTrue, code ifFalse);


The problem, of course, is that `code` isn't a type in C: there's no easy way
to pass around a reference to a chunk of code outside of function pointers.
Smalltalk doesn't have that problem-- it has _blocks_.

That's what the square brackets are doing in the original example. They create
a block: a chunk of unevaluated code encapsulated as an object. If you do
this:



    [ "hi" print ]


It doesn't print "hi". Instead, it creates an object representing that chunk
of code. If you then _call_ the block by sending it a `value` message:



    [ "hi" print ] value


_Then_ it will print the string. Of course, you don't have to call a block
immediately, or at all. You can store it in a variable, pass it to another
function, call it repeatedly, etc.

The other piece of syntax to understand is Smalltalk's notion of a "keyword".
In most languages, keywords are reserved words built into the language. In
Smalltalk, keywords are just another kind of user-defined function like
regular method calls or operators. Keywords are identified by ending the name
with a colon (`:`). They're used in Smalltalk to send messages to objects with
multiple arguments. Where in C you would do `AddKeyValue(dictionary, "key",
"value")`, in Smalltalk you'd say `dictionary addKey: "key" value: "value"`.

Now we can understand how the original Smalltalk code works. `numWeasels >
numCakes` is an expression that returns a boolean value. `ifTrue:ifFalse:` is
then a message sent to that boolean. It takes two arguments, a "then" block
and an "else" else block. If the boolean value is true, it evaluates the
"then" block, otherwise it evaluates the "else" block. No special syntax
required.

Keywords and blocks are a fantastically powerful system. Blocks may also take
arguments and can access variables declared outside of their scopes (i.e. they
are [closures][52]), which means you've got a very simple syntax that lets you
create all sorts of control structures and functional idioms like `map` and
`filter`. It just looks funny.

   [52]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Closure_%28computer_science%29

### Back to Finch

I wanted Finch to have that power but look less funny. (According to my
definition of "funny", of course. Smalltalkers think their language looks
perfectly normal.) Here's how our example would look in Finch:



    if: numWeasels > numCakes then: {
        write: "Not enough cakes!"
    } else: {
        from: 1 to: numWeasels do: {
            write: "A weasel eats a cake!"
        }
    }


The first minor change is using curlies to define blocks instead of square
brackets. The more interesting change is that `if:then:else:` doesn't seem to
have a receiver-- an object that the method is acting on.

You'll remember in Smalltalk that the condition `numWeasels > numCakes` comes
_before_ the `ifTrue:ifFalse` message. That's because `ifTrue:ifFalse` is a
method on boolean objects.

That's a smart solution for Smalltalk, but it seemed strange to me to see the
condition first. I think most programmers want to see the keyword to
understand what that condition is for before seeing the expression itself.
Hence `if:` comes before `numWeasels > numCakes`.

So how do I square that with the fact that Finch is OOP and every method must
be a method on some object?

### Enter the Ether

The answer is: through a little parser trick. If the parser encounters a
keyword message before it's encountered a receiver to send that message to
(i.e. it parses `foo: bar` instead of `obj foo: bar` as expected), it
automatically inserts `Ether` before it. "Ether" is a special global object
that represents the implicit receiver of keyword messages if the receiver is
omitted. (In some ways, this is similar to how you can omit `this` in most OOP
languages.)

When you call `if:then:else:` in Finch, you're sending that message to Ether,
which is what handles the message. The result, I think, is a syntax as
powerful as Smalltalk, but one that reads more naturally.

At the same time, we haven't given up any of the flexibility of a dynamic OOP
language. Ether is just a normal global object, which means you can add your
own methods to it as you see fit. This lets you create top-level control
structures in Finch that look just like "real" ones.

For example, the `from:to:do:` block we saw earlier is actually written in
Finch. It uses `while:do:` which is the only looping construct explicitly
built into the interpreter. Its definition is:



    Ether :: from: start to: end do: block {
        i <- start
        while: { i <= end } do: {
            block call: i
            i <-- i + 1
        }
    }


Discuss this at one of the sites below (or another of your choice):

[ ![][53]][54]

   [53]: http://cdn.stumble-upon.com/images/120x20_su_white.gif
   [54]: http://www.stumbleupon.com/submit?url=http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com%26title%3DThe%2BArticle%2BTitle

If you want to contact me directly, feel free to email at "name@site" where
"name" is "robert" and "site" is "stuffwithstuff.com".

(C) 2008-2009 Robert Nystrom


