# [journal.

stuffwithstuff.com][1]

   [1]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/

## me

  * [bob nystrom][2] is me
  * [bitbucket][3] has code
  * [github][4] has code
  * [flickr][5] has photos
  * [twitter][6] has status
  * [vimeo][7] has video

   [2]: http://www.stuffwithstuff.com/bob-nystrom.html
   [3]: http://bitbucket.org/munificent/
   [4]: http://github.com/munificent/
   [5]: http://www.flickr.com/photos/bobisbob/
   [6]: http://twitter.com/munificentbob
   [7]: http://vimeo.com/bobisbob

## archives

  * [2011][8]
  * [2010][9]
  * [2009][10]
  * [2008][11]

   [8]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/2011/ (2011)
   [9]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/2010/ (2010)
   [10]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/2009/ (2009)
   [11]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/2008/ (2008)

## tags

  * [blog][12] (2)
  * [c#][13] (13)
  * [code][14] (48)
  * [cpp][15] (7)
  * [design][16] (3)
  * [f#][17] (2)
  * [finch][18] (3)
  * [game-dev][19] (6)
  * [game-patterns][20] (3)
  * [go][21] (2)
  * [jasic][22] (1)
  * [java][23] (10)
  * [javascript][24] (3)
  * [language][25] (29)
  * [magpie][26] (19)
  * [optimization][27] (1)
  * [oscon][28] (1)
  * [parsing][29] (7)
  * [politics][30] (1)
  * [python][31] (2)
  * [roguelike][32] (2)
  * [ruby][33] (1)
  * [sml][34] (1)
  * [visualization][35] (1)

   [12]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/blog/ (View all posts filed under blog)
   [13]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/c/ (View all posts filed under c#)
   [14]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/code/ (View all posts filed under code)
   [15]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/cpp/ (View all posts filed under cpp)
   [16]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/design/ (View all posts filed under design)
   [17]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/f/ (View all posts filed under f#)
   [18]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/finch/ (View all posts filed under finch)
   [19]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/game-dev/ (View all posts filed under game-dev)
   [20]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/game-patterns/ (View all posts filed under game-patterns)
   [21]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/go/ (View all posts filed under go)
   [22]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/jasic/ (View all posts filed under jasic)
   [23]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/java/ (View all posts filed under java)
   [24]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/javascript/ (View all posts filed under javascript)
   [25]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/language/ (View all posts filed under language)
   [26]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/magpie/ (View all posts filed under magpie)
   [27]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/optimization/ (View all posts filed under optimization)
   [28]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/oscon/ (View all posts filed under oscon)
   [29]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/parsing/ (View all posts filed under parsing)
   [30]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/politics/ (View all posts filed under politics)
   [31]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/python/ (View all posts filed under python)
   [32]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/roguelike/ (View all posts filed under roguelike)
   [33]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/ruby/ (View all posts filed under ruby)
   [34]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/sml/ (View all posts filed under sml)
   [35]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/visualization/ (View all posts filed under visualization)

## info

  * [famfamfam][36] provides icons
  * [RSS][37] syndicates me
  * [WordPress][38] powers me

   [36]: http://famfamfam.com/lab/icons/silk/
   [37]: feed:http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/feed/
   [38]: http://wordpress.org/

## [What I learned at the Emerging Languages Camp][39]

   [39]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/2010/07/23/what-i-learned-at-the-emerging-languages-camp/ (What I learned at the Emerging Languages Camp)

[code][40] | [language][41] | [parsing][42] [2010][43] / [07][44] / [23][45]

   [40]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/code/ (View all posts in code)
   [41]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/language/ (View all posts in language)
   [42]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/category/parsing/ (View all posts in parsing)
   [43]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/2010/ (year)
   [44]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/2010/07/ (month)
   [45]: http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/2010/07/23/

I just got back from the unbelievably awesome [Emerging Languages Camp][46] at
[OSCON][47]. I wish I could come up with a good way to get across how cool of
an experience it was. All I can really say was that for the first time in a
long, I felt like I was really around my people.

   [46]: http://emerginglangs.com/
   [47]: http://www.oscon.com/

A programming language nerd is a really specific kind of nerd and I don't
really know many who share my obsession. For the last two days, I was in a
room packed with people who did.

It's hard to summarize two intense days of full-on nerdery, but I thought I
would talk a bit about something good I got from some of the talks. This
doesn't mean I agreed with them all (honestly, I found the Go talk myopic), or
that anyone I omitted here _wasn't_ interesting. I'm honestly exhausted this
morning, so I only have so much steam.

### Rob Pike (Go)

The theme that comes up frequently when I read about [Go][48] or hear Rob talk
about it is this sense of pragmatic feature economy. Any time someone asks,
"why doesn't Go have Foo", his answer tends to be "We found in practice that
we don't miss it."

   [48]: http://golang.org/

Language designers can tend to be [magpies][49], wanting to cram in all of our
favorite features just because they're shiny or to have a longer bullet list
than the other guy. If those features don't help real people solve real
problems, you're just wasting your time and making things more complex for
them. While I don't always agree with the specific choices that the Go
designers make, I do agree with the "let's see if we can get by without them"
approach that leads to them.

   [49]: http://bitbucket.org/munificent/magpie/src

### Phil Mercurio (Thyrd)

Phil's talk was one of a few on visual programming. Most of my experience with
visual languages is that they're either toys or incomprehensible timecube-
esque crankware.

Phil got up and humbly walked through [his visual language][50]. When he asked
for questions at the end, there was a long pause before any hands went up.
From talking to people afterward, I think the consensus was that we were all
thinking, "Holy crap, he actually did it."

   [50]: http://thyrd.org/

He managed to find a small kernel for a visual language (nested grids and
triads) and build something out of it that really works. It's _really_ hard to
pull something like this off, and I think it's cool that's he had the insight
and tenacity to keep cranking away at it.

### Alan Eliasen (Frink)

Alan stressed that [Frink][51] is a general-purpose language with user-defined
functions and stuff but its _raison d'etre_ is doing arithmetic with units,
which it does so unbelievably comprehensively that it boggles the mind. From
his talk, I can only assume that Alan's house is packed floor-to-ceiling with
yellowing almanacs and dusty IEEE standards reports. Calling his knowledge of
measure encyclopedic is giving encyclopedias too much credit.

   [51]: http://futureboy.homeip.net/frinkdocs/

What I found interesting about Frink is that by limiting its focus to a single
domain, Alan has ended up with a language that's _more_ powerful and useful.
When asked what their language is good for, many designers would say
"everything" which really means "nothing". Frink embodies the principle of
doing one thing and doing it well.

### Gilad Bracha (Newspeak)

The camp was an even mix of academics and hackers. A lot of academic talk is
over my head so the mortarboard team is underrepresented in this post. Gilad's
talk was in that category: a lot of it was too high-level for my primitive
monkey brain to grasp.

One thing really stuck with me though. [Newspeak][52] doesn't have namespaces,
modules, or a lot of other OOP features. What it does have is classes, and
classes nest. That simple core is flexible enough to do duty as a module
system, an abstraction system, a namespace system etc. I love the idea of
getting one simple concept and letting it fully unfold to cover a bunch of
different problem solutions.

   [52]: http://bracha.org/Site/Newspeak.html

### Jeremy Ashkenas (Coffeescript)

I totally didn't pay attention to Jeremy's talk because I was busy slapping
together slides for mine. This sucks because I think [Coffeescript][53] is
fantastic. I love its obsession with aesthetics and clarity. Both the language
and its documentation are a testament to the philosophy that beautiful is
usable. I wish more language designers would pay heed to that.

   [53]: http://jashkenas.github.com/coffee-script/

### Steve Folta (Trylon)

Steve's talk embodied two ideals that I think are often overlooked. The first
thing he said when he got up was, "Trylon doesn't do anything new." That puts
[Trylon][54] in the same space as Python, Ruby, and almost every popular
language today. If you want to publish papers and advance the art, breaking
new ground is key. If you want a language for people to use, there's real
value in staying away from the borderlands.

   [54]: http://github.com/stevefolta/trylon

The other thing he said that struck me was, "When I get home I program in
Trylon because it's the language that feels the most fun to me." A well-worn
truism in writing is "write for yourself." Trying to make a language that's
all things to all people is futile and exhausting. I love that Steve just made
the language that _he_ wanted.

### Amos Wenger (ooc)

Any domain has two levels of knowledge: the core ideas for the domain, and the
_cultural_ wisdom _around_ those ideas. The first tells you how to do stuff.
The latter often tells you which stuff not to do. Any well-versed programming
language person can tell you about both recursive-descent parsers and
generated parsers. They'll also tell that generated parsers are the "right"
way to do that.

Most of the time that advice will save you from wasted effort, but sometimes I
think it keeps people from going down paths that may actually be fruitful.
Sometimes the thing that everyone knows is true isn't. (For example, every
language I know of with a lot of real-world users actually does use a hand-
written parser.)

Amos is a young French iconoclast. If he'd been born in a different time, I
expect he'd be a brick-tossing anarchist. One advantage that attitude gives
him is that he and the others working on [ooc][55] pour features into the
language while the rest of us are still sitting around fretting about minutia.
I think a lot of us could use some of that "let's just fucking do it" spirit.

   [55]: http://ooc-lang.org/

Discuss this at one of the sites below (or another of your choice):

[ ![][56]][57]

   [56]: http://cdn.stumble-upon.com/images/120x20_su_white.gif
   [57]: http://www.stumbleupon.com/submit?url=http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com%26title%3DThe%2BArticle%2BTitle

If you want to contact me directly, feel free to email at "name@site" where
"name" is "robert" and "site" is "stuffwithstuff.com".

(C) 2008-2009 Robert Nystrom


